1. What is Data hiding?

2. What is Abstraction?

3. What is Encapsulation?

4. Explain the advantages and disadvantages of Encapsulation?

5. What is tightly encapsulated class?

6. What is IS-A relationship?

7. Which keyword is used for IS-A relationship?

8. What are various advantages of IS-A relationship?

9. Explain about HAS-A relationship?

10. What is composition?

11. What is aggregation?

12. What is method signature?

13. What is overloading?

14. What are various rules satisfied by overloaded methods?

15. What is static polymorphism (or) compile-time polymorphism (or) early binding?

16. Differentiate IS-A and HAS-A relationships?

17. Is it possible to overload main() method?

18. In overloading whether jvm or compiler is responsible for method resolution?

19. What is overriding?

20. What is runtime polymorphism or dynamic polymorphism or late binding?

21. What are various rules satisfied by overriding methods?

22. Is it possible to override the following methods ? final methods , abstract methods       synchronized methods ,native methods ,strictfp methods , private methods .

23. What are co-variant return types?

24. While overriding is it compulsory to maintain same return type?

25. In overriding who is responsible for method resolution?

26. What is dynamic method dispatch?

27. If parent class method throws some checked exception while overriding is it
       compulsory should throw child class method the same checked exception?

28. Is it possible to overriding constructor?

29. Is it possible to overriding non-abstract method as abstract ?

30. Is it possible to override a var-arg method with a general method?

31. Is it possible to override static method?

32. What is method hiding?

33. Explain differences b/w overriding and method hiding?

34. Is it possible to override main() method?

35. Is it possible to override a variable?

36. Who is responsible for variable resolution?

37. What are key differences b/w overriding and overloading?

38. Explain various activities which are executed while loading the class?

39. When ever we are loading child class is it required to load parent class?

40. When ever we are loading parent class is it required to load child class?

41. What is purpose of static block and explain its requirement with examples?

42. Is it possible to take multiple static blocks in the same java class?

43. When the static blocks will be executed?

44. Whit out using main() method is it possible to print some statements to console?

45. Whit out using main() and static blocks is it possible to print some statements?

46. What is instance block when it will be executed?

47. Difference b/w instance block and static block?

48. When ever we are creating an object what are various steps will be executed
       internally?

49. Difference b/w constructor and instance block?

50. What is coupling?

51. Is it recommended tight coupling or loose coupling?

52. What is cohesion?

53. Is it recommended high cohesion or low cohesion?

54. Explain about object type casting and what are various rules we have to follow while        performing type casting?

55. Is it possible to type cast parent object to the child type?

56. Is it possible to type cast child object to the parent type?

57. Explain the main important oops concepts?

58. What is the purpose of constructor?

59. Explain about default constructor and its prototype?

60. Is compiler generates default constructor always?

61. Is it possible to take return type for the constructor?

62. If we are taking return type to the constructor what will happen?

63. Explain about super() and this() ?

64. Is it possible to overload constructors?

65. Is inheritance concept applicable for constructor?

66. What are various modifiers applicable for constructors?

67. Where we can use private constructors?

68. What is singleton class and give an example?

69. Is it possible to create our own singleton class and explain the process?

70. What is factory method?

71. Explain about recursive constructor invocation?

72. If parent class constructor throws some checked exception is it compulsory to require
       to throw that exception by child class constructor?

73. Is the first line in constructor is always super?

74. Is it possible to write a constructor in abstract class?

75. We can’t create an object of abstract class what is the need of constructor in abstract
       class?

76. Is it possible to place constructor in an interface?















1. What is Data hiding?

Answer: Data hiding is an object-oriented programming concept where internal object details are hidden from the outside world, allowing access only through public methods. It enhances security by restricting direct access to private data.

2. What is Abstraction?

Answer: Abstraction is the process of hiding implementation details and showing only essential features of an object. It is implemented using abstract classes or interfaces.

3. What is Encapsulation?

Answer: Encapsulation is the process of bundling data (fields) and methods that operate on that data into a single unit, like a class. It provides controlled access using access modifiers (e.g., private, public).

4. Explain the advantages and disadvantages of Encapsulation?

Answer:Advantages:

Enhances security and data protection.

Improves code maintainability.

Promotes modular design.Disadvantages:

Slightly increases code complexity due to access control.

5. What is a tightly encapsulated class?

Answer: A class is tightly encapsulated if all its variables are private and accessed only through public getter and setter methods.

6. What is IS-A relationship?

Answer: An IS-A relationship represents inheritance in object-oriented programming where one class derives from another (e.g., Dog IS-A Animal).

7. Which keyword is used for IS-A relationship?

Answer: The extends keyword.

8. What are various advantages of IS-A relationship?

Answer:

Promotes code reusability.

Supports polymorphism.

Simplifies code structure.

9. Explain about HAS-A relationship?

Answer: A HAS-A relationship represents composition where one class contains an object of another class (e.g., Car HAS-A Engine).

10. What is composition?

Answer: Composition is a design principle where a class is composed of one or more objects of other classes, representing a "part-of" relationship.

11. What is aggregation?

Answer: Aggregation is a form of composition where the contained objects can exist independently of the container object.

12. What is method signature?

Answer: A method signature includes the method name and parameter list (e.g., void display(String name)).

13. What is overloading?

Answer: Overloading allows methods with the same name to exist but with different parameter lists within the same class.

14. What are various rules satisfied by overloaded methods?

Answer:

Same method name.

Different parameter lists (type, number, or order).

Can have different return types.

15. What is static polymorphism (or compile-time polymorphism)?

Answer: It is achieved through method overloading, where the method to be executed is determined at compile time.

16. Differentiate IS-A and HAS-A relationships?

Answer:

IS-A: Inheritance (e.g., Dog IS-A Animal).

HAS-A: Composition (e.g., Car HAS-A Engine).

17. Is it possible to overload the main() method?

Answer: Yes, but only the standard main(String[] args) method is used as the program entry point.

18. In overloading, whether JVM or compiler is responsible for method resolution?

Answer: The compiler is responsible.

19. What is overriding?

Answer: Overriding allows a subclass to provide a specific implementation of a method already defined in its parent class.

20. What is runtime polymorphism or dynamic polymorphism?

Answer: It is achieved through method overriding, where the method to be executed is determined at runtime.

21. What are various rules satisfied by overriding methods?

Answer:

Same method name, parameter list, and return type.

The overriding method cannot reduce visibility.

The overriding method can throw fewer or no exceptions.

22. Is it possible to override the following methods?

Answer:

Final methods: No.

Abstract methods: Yes.

Synchronized methods: Yes.

Native methods: Yes.

Strictfp methods: Yes.

Private methods: No.

23. What are co-variant return types?

Answer: In overriding, the return type of the overridden method in the child class can be a subclass of the return type in the parent class.

24. While overriding, is it compulsory to maintain the same return type?

Answer: Not always. Co-variant return types are allowed.

25. In overriding, who is responsible for method resolution?

Answer: The JVM at runtime.

26. What is dynamic method dispatch?

Answer: Dynamic method dispatch is the process where the JVM determines which overridden method to call at runtime.

27. If the parent class method throws some checked exception, is it compulsory for the child class method to throw the same?

Answer: No, the child class method can throw the same or a subclass of the exception or no exception at all.

28. Is it possible to override a constructor?

Answer: No, constructors cannot be overridden.

29. Is it possible to override a non-abstract method as abstract?

Answer: No, a non-abstract method cannot be overridden as abstract.

30. Is it possible to override a var-arg method with a general method?

Answer: No, the var-arg method takes precedence.

31. Is it possible to override a static method?

Answer: No, static methods are hidden, not overridden.

32. What is method hiding?

Answer: When a static method in the parent class is redefined in a child class, it is called method hiding.

33. Explain differences between overriding and method hiding?

Answer:

Overriding: Works with instance methods.

Hiding: Works with static methods.

34. Is it possible to override the main() method?

Answer: No, main() is static, so it can only be hidden.

35. Is it possible to override a variable?

Answer: No, variables are shadowed, not overridden.

36. Who is responsible for variable resolution?

Answer: The compiler.

37. What are key differences between overriding and overloading?

Answer:

Overloading: Same method name, different parameters.

Overriding: Same method name, parameters, and return type in parent and child.

38. Explain various activities executed while loading the class?

Answer:

Class loader loads the class.

Memory is allocated.

Static blocks and static variables are initialized.

39. Whenever we are loading a child class, is it required to load the parent class?

Answer: Yes, the parent class is loaded first.

40. Whenever we are loading a parent class, is it required to load the child class?

Answer: No, the child class is not loaded unless explicitly required.

41. What is the purpose of the static block, and explain its requirement with examples?

Answer: A static block is used to initialize static variables and execute logic at the time of class loading. Example:

static {
    System.out.println("Static block executed");
}

42. Is it possible to take multiple static blocks in the same Java class?

Answer: Yes, multiple static blocks are allowed, and they execute in the order they are defined.

43. When will the static blocks be executed?

Answer: Static blocks are executed when the class is loaded into memory.

44. Without using the main() method, is it possible to print some statements to the console?

Answer: Yes, using a static block.

45. Without using main() and static blocks, is it possible to print some statements?

Answer: No, main() or static blocks are required for execution.

46. What is an instance block, and when will it be executed?

Answer: An instance block is executed each time an object of the class is created, before the constructor.

47. Difference between instance block and static block?

Answer:

Static block: Executes once when the class is loaded.

Instance block: Executes every time an object is created.